$Id: README,v 1.0 2010/08/04 18:56:41 lehman stable $

ABOUT

The logreq package helps to automate a typical LaTeX workflow that
involves running LaTeX several times, running tools such as BibTeX
or makeindex, and so on. It will log requests like "please rerun
LaTeX" or "please run BibTeX on file X" to an external XML file
which lists all open tasks in a machine-readable format. Compiler
scripts and integrated LaTeX editing environments may parse this
file to determine the next steps in the workflow in a way that is
more efficient than parsing the main log file. In sum, the package
will do two things: 1) enable package authors to use LaTeX commands
to issue requests, 2) collect all requests from all packages and
write them to an external XML file at the end of the document.

LICENSE

Copyright (c) 2010 Philipp Lehman. Permission is granted to copy,
distribute and/or modify this software under the terms of the LaTeX
Project Public License (LPPL), version 1.3. The LPPL maintenance
status of this software is 'maintained'. The current maintainer is
Philipp Lehman. This software is provided 'as is', without warranty
of any kind, either expressed or implied, including, but not limited
to, the implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a
particular purpose.

REQUIREMENTS

- e-TeX
- etoolbox 1.9 or later
- keyval

DOCUMENTATION

Unfortunately, there is no formal documentation for this package at
the moment. For the time being, have a look at the examples which
ship with the package and read this draft:

https://sourceforge.net/apps/mediawiki/biblatex/index.php?title=Workflow_Automation

A real manual will be added soon.
